# Variables, operators, and types

Open the REPL (the command line interface for Julia) by typing `julia` in the terminal.
REPL stands for Read-Eval-Print Loop.

Follow along with the code examples below in the REPL.
Adapt the code based on student feedback and progression.
Remember to ask students to try things out themselves and play with the code.
Use the question, "What do you think will happen?" to encourage students to think about the code before running it. Also a useful way of thinking about their optics setups later.


## Assignment and basic operations
Start with basic operations on one variable.
In programming, `=` is used for assignment, not equality.

```julia
julia> a = 2  # assignment
2

julia> a  # print the value of a
2

julia> a + 1  # addition
3

julia> a - 1  # subtraction
1

julia> a * 2  # multiplication
4

julia> a^2  # exponentiation
4

julia> a / 2  # division
1.0  # what's going on here?
```


### Exercises

1. Find the value of `x` at the end of this block of code.

    ```julia
    x = 3
    y = x
    x = x + 1
    x = y
    ```

2. What happens if you try to use a variable that has not been defined yet?

    ```julia
    num_cats = 5
    num_Cats
    ```
3. Calculate how many seconds there are in 3 years. Use variables to assign intermediate values.


## Types
We can use the `typeof` function to check the type of a variable.
Now let's create some variables of different types and explore Julia's type system.

```julia
julia> a = 2
2

julia> b = 2.0
2.0

julia> c = 3.0 + 4.0im  # complex number
3.0 + 4.0im

julia> d = "hello"  # double quotes for strings
"hello"

julia> e = 'a'  # single quotes for characters
'a': ASCII/Unicode U+0061 (category Ll: Letter, lowercase)

julia> typeof(a)
Int64

julia> typeof(b)
Float64

julia> typeof(c)
ComplexF64 (alias for Complex{Float64})

julia> typeof(d)
String
```


Going back to the division example, we can see that the type of the result depends on the operator.
The `/` operator performs floating-point division, which means it returns a `Float64` type.
If we want to perform integer division, we can use the `div` function or the `รท` operator.

```julia
julia> a = 2  # assign a
2

julia> a / 2  # floating-point division
1.0

julia> a รท 2  # integer division
1

julia> a // 4  # rational number
1//2
```


### Exercises
1. Check the definitions of `div`, `รท`, and `//` by typing `?div`, `?รท`, and `?//` in the REPL.
2. Can you make a complex *integer*?
3. Try operations with different types (like `1 + 2.0`). What happens?
4. What is the type of operators like `*` and `+`?


## Strings
Text data is represented as a sequence of characters called a string.
String can be operated on, but the operations are different from those for numbers.

```julia
julia> s = "hello"
"hello"

julia> s * s  # string concatenation
"hellohello"

julia> s^3
"hellohellohello"
```

There are also multi-line strings, which are defined with triple quotes.

```julia
"""
This is a multi-line string.
It can span multiple lines.
It is useful for writing long text or documentation.
"""
```

We can also return a character from a string by indexing.
We can get the third to eighth characters of a string by using the colon operator `:`.

```julia
julia> s = "Hello world"
"Hello world"

julia> s[1]  # first character
'H': ASCII/Unicode U+0048 (category Lu: Letter, uppercase)

julia> s[3:8]  
"llo wo"
```

### String interpolation
String interpolation is a way to include variables or expressions inside a string.
You can use the `$` symbol to interpolate a variable or expression into a string.

```julia
julia> name = "Alice"
"Alice"

julia> age = 30
30

julia> "My name is $name and I am $age years old."
"My name is Alice and I am 30 years old."
```
You can also use `$()` syntax to include expressions inside a string.

```julia
julia> "In 5 years, I will be $(age + 5) years old."
"In 5 years, I will be 35 years old."
```


### Exercises
1. What happens when you type `a = hello` (no quotes)? What is the meaning of the single and double quotes?
2. What happens if you try to multiply a string by a number? Read the error message.
3. What does the function `length` do? Try it on a string and a number.
4. What does the function `string` do? Try it on a number, a string, and a variable.
5. What happens if `j` is replaced by `end` in the above expression?


## Boolean logic and conditionals
Logical operators are used to perform logical operations on boolean values.
Booleans are a type that can be either `true` or `false`.

```julia
julia> t = true
true

julia> f = false
false
```

### Logical operators
Logical operators are used to perform logical operations on boolean values.

```julia
julia> t && f  # logical AND
false

julia> t || f  # logical OR
true

julia> !t  # logical NOT
false
```
For complicated expressions, we can use parentheses to group operations.

```julia
!(x > 0) && (y < 0)
```


### Comparison operators
Comparison operators are used to compare values and return a boolean value.

```julia
julia> a = 1
1

julia> b = 2
2

julia> a < b  # less than
true

julia> a >= b  # greater than or equal to
false

julia> a == b  # equal to
false

julia> a != b  # not equal to
true
```

You can also compare boolean values directly.

```julia
julia> t == f  # Boolean equality
false

julia> t === f  # strict equality
false

julia> t !== f  # strict inequality
true
```


### Exercises
1. What is the type result returned by `1 == 2`?
2. Use the REPL to learn about the `isa` function by typing `?isa`.
    - Use `isa` to check the type of `a` and `b`. What does it return?
    - What type is `isa`? How can you check this?
3. What is the difference between `==` and `===`?
4.  Make the statement `"Hello world"[i:j] == "o wo"` return `true`.


## Problems
1. Write a short program that prints only the even number between 1 and 10 that are not divisible by 4.

2. Try fixing the logic in this conditional. It's supposed to check if x is between 10 and 20, inclusive.
Why doesn't the original code work as expected?

    ```julia
    x = 15
    if x > 10 || x < 20
        println("x is between 10 and 20")
    else
        println("x is not between 10 and 20")
    end
    ```


## Finding help

- [Official Julia Documentation](https://docs.julialang.org/)
- [Julia tutorials list](https://julialang.org/learning/tutorials/)
- [The Julia WikiBook](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Introducing_Julia)
- [The Julia Express](https://ucidatascienceinitiative.github.io/IntroToJulia/)
