# Conditionals and iteration

Conditionals allow you to control the flow of execution in your code.
This includes `if` statements, `for` loops, and `while` loops.
It executes different blocks of code based on the value of a boolean expression.


## If statements
If statements allow you to execute code conditionally based on a boolean expression.
For example, you can use `if` to check if a number is greater than zero.
```julia
x = 5
if x > 0
    println("x is positive")
end
```
This statement will print "x is positive" because `x` is greater than zero.
If `x` were less than or equal to zero, the code inside the `if` block would not execute.
Nothing happens.
Usually, you want to do something if the condition is false, so you can use `else` to specify an alternative block of code.
```julia
x = -5
if x > 0
    println("x is positive")
else
    println("x is not positive")
end
```

There is a third option called `elseif` that allows you to check multiple conditions.
Let's use this to check if a number is positive, negative or zero.
```julia
x = 0
if x > 0
    println("x is positive")
elseif x < 0
    println("x is negative")
else
    println("x is zero")
end
```

### Exercises
1. Write a program that prints a message basd on the temperature. For example: \
    Below 0: "It's freezing!" \
    Between 0 and 20: "It's cold." \
    Between 20 and 30: "It's warm." \
    Above 30: "It's hot!"



## *For* statements
For loops allow you to iterate over a range of values or elements in a collection.

```julia
for i in 1:10
    println(i)
end
```

To iterate over a collection, you can use the `for` loop as follows:

```julia
fruits = ["apple", "banana", "cherry"]
for fruit in fruits
    println(fruit)
end
```

If you want to iterate over a collection and keep track of the index, you can use the `enumerate` function.

```julia
fruits = ["apple", "banana", "cherry"]
for (index, fruit) in enumerate(fruits)
    println("Index: $index, Fruit: $fruit")
end
```

If you *only* want the index, you can use the `eachindex` function.

```julia
fruits = ["apple", "banana", "cherry"]
for index in eachindex(fruits)
    println("Index: $index")
end
```

## *While* statements
While loops allow you to execute a block of code as long as a condition is true.
The code block below will print the numbers from 1 to 10 by incrementing a variable `i` by 1 with each iteration.

```julia
i = 1
while i <= 10
    println(i)
    i += 1
end
```

### Exercises
1. Write a program that take a positive integer and returns the sum of all integers from 1 to that number.


### Problems
1. There is a famous conjecture in mathematics ([the Collatz conjecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collatz_conjecture)) that states that any positive integer can be reduced to 1 by repeated application of these rules:

    1. If the number is even, divide it by two.
    2. If the number is odd, triple it and add one.

    ```math
    f(n) = \begin{cases}
        n/2 & \text{if } n \text{ is even} \\ 3n + 1 & \text{if } n \text{ is odd} \end{cases}
    ```
    Write a function that produces a sequence of numbers starting from a positive integer $n$ and applying the rules above until it reaches 1.

