# Files, folders, and environments

The concept of files and folders are reviewed and then a tour of Visual Studio Code is given.
Students create a project folder to store their tutorial files and future experiment code.
This ensures consistent data storage and analysis practices in the lab.
We also cover environments and how to create a new environment for each project.
This is important for reproducibility and to avoid package conflicts.


## Files and folders on a computer
On a computer, files are stored in folders (directories), where a folder can contain both files and other folders.
We want to store files and folders in a way that makes it easy to find and organize them.
It is important in science to have well-organized data and code for reproducibility.

Follow these steps to create a project folder for your tutorials and experiments:

1. On macOS, go to `~/Documents/` and create a new folder called `projects`. On Windows go to `C:\Users\<username>\Documents\` and create a new folder called `projects`. This is where you will store your projects while you are in the lab.

2. Inside of `projects`, create a new folder called `tutorials`. This is where you will store code for these tutorials.

3. In `tutorials`, create a folder called `intro to programming` or something similar.

4. Open Visual Studio Code and open the `tutorials` folder that you just created.

5. Create a new file called `lesson2.jl` in the `intro to programming` folder. This is where you will write your code for this lesson.

Next we will create a new environment for this project.


## Environments
In Julia, an environment is a collection of packages and their versions that are used for a specific project.
This is important for reproducibility and to avoid package conflicts.

To create a new environment, follow these steps:
1. Open the Julia REPL in Visual Studio Code via the Command Palette (Ctrl+Shift+P) and find `Julia: Start REPL`.
2. In the REPL, type `]` to enter the package manager. (Hit backspace to exit the package manager and return to the Julia REPL.)
3. Type `activate .` to create a new environment in the current folder.

Notice that a `Project.toml` file and a `Manifest.toml` file were created in your project folder.
These files contain information about the packages and their versions that are used in this environment.

When Makie has finished installing and compiling, let's go back to the REPL in VS Code and learn about functions.
